JAKE: I actually do that.
Do you ever do that?
If it's a quiet tube--
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE: You just adopt a skiing--
SURMA: I try to surf it.
JAKE: Yeah.
SURMA: And try to, like,
counteract the curves.
JAKE: Bent knees, ski stance.
SURMA: Silver Surfer!
JAKE: Surf the-- yeah.
Yeah.
I do that.
SURMA: We're weird.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Tech in general, but
web dev specifically,
suffers a lot from people
creating acronyms and throwing
them out there.
And then, they just develop
a life of their own,
and suddenly everyone is
using AJAX and nobody knows
what it actually stands for.
JAKE: Yes.
SURMA: Or serverless, or you
know, all of these things.
Like, wait, serverless?
JAKE: PWA.
SURMA: [VOCALIZING]
[LAUGHTER]
JAKE: It is a buzzword.
It is a buzzword.
SURMA: It is a buzzword.
And honestly, we never had
a good definition of PWA.
So people kind of don't
know what they're supposed
to do if they want to be a PWA.
JAKE: Yeah.
SURMA: But another thing
I've heard recently--
and I'm not sure if Netlify
people came up with it,
or if they are just pushing it--
but there's a buzzword
around the JAMstack.
JAKE: Right.
And it's a word I've heard,
and I couldn't actually
tell you what it means.
Phil Hawksworth who
works in Netlify--
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE: I've seen
him speak about it.
SURMA: Exactly.
JAKE: And I feel you
should be offended that I
don't know what it stands for.
SURMA: I heard [INAUDIBLE] as
well, and he talked about it.
And it was like, so
basically what you're saying
is common sense?
JAKE: Oh!
SURMA: And now I looked
into the actual website,
and it felt really interesting
because it's a good pitch,
but I actually don't agree
with it in that absolute way
as it is presented.
JAKE: Oh, so like AJAX, then?
SURMA: Kind of.
Yeah.
So I sort of just copied the
definitions that they give
and the explanation
that they give.
And I thought we could just
talk about them, because it's
actually quite-- it's
because we have built
things in the recent past.
JAKE: Yes.
SURMA: And we might
have opinions.
JAKE: OK.
SURMA: So for context, Netlify,
if you haven't used it, is a--
to give an understatement,
it's a static site hoster.
JAKE: Yes.
SURMA: Like, it
hosts a static site.
JAKE: Yes, CDN.
SURMA: But it just integrates
really well into your GitHub,
and it has, like, tools for
supporting forms and all
these little things.
JAKE: And we're big fans.
Like, it integrates
really well with--
SURMA: Yes, not sponsored.
JAKE: Not sponsored.
That'd be nice, though.
SURMA: Why not?
Yeah.
JAKE: We should get some.
I do actually have a
Netlify hoodie, so you know.
SURMA: Oh, I want
a Netlify hoodie.
JAKE: And this probably
counts as being dodgy.
SURMA: So let's start
with the basics, I guess.
The JAMstack-- what
does it stand for?
JAKE: Right.
SURMA: So it's
basically an acronym--
J, A, and M, and
that's your stack.
JAKE: Yeah.
SURMA: And J stands
for JavaScript.
JAKE: Yeah, it does.
SURMA: Big surprise.
And basically, what
they're saying is--
JAKE: Like the J in AJAX.
Good.
Right.
SURMA: Any dynamic programming
during the request response
cycle is handled by JavaScript
running entirely on the client.
This could be any frontend,
framework, library,
or even vanilla JavaScript.
They make it sound so absurd.
JAKE: Even vanilla JavaScripts?
SURMA: I know.
It can.
That makes sense.
JAKE: You can do that now.
SURMA: That's absurd, isn't it?
JAKE: OK.
SURMA: And I'm wondering,
like, any dynamic programming
during the request
response cycle?
Why won't output be--
JAKE: So it could stand
for, not JavaScript.
Is that what we're saying?
SURMA: No.
But it has to be
handled by JavaScript.
And we're like, what's
the alternative?
How can you handle any
dynamic programming on the--
JAKE: Oh, I see.
I see.
SURMA: Right?
So it's a bit, OK, cool.
So the one part of the
stack is using JavaScript.
Cool.
Then, they're saying the
A for APIs, meaning that--
JAKE: Oh, so that
stands for an acronym.
Good.
SURMA: All server-side processes
or database actions are
abstracted into reusable
APIs accessed over HTTPS--
good-- with JavaScript.
And these can be custom built or
leverage third-party services.
JAKE: OK.
SURMA: Sure.
So you use APIs.
That's something that has
been around for a while.
I mean, the--
JAKE: Someone thought
of JAM, and then
thought of what words--
SURMA: Maybe
JAKE: These things
could stand for.
Anyway, OK.
I'll try not to be as cynical.
SURMA: M stands for Markup.
And basically, templated
markup should be pre-built
at deploy time,
usually using a site
generator for content sites
or a build tool for web apps.
JAKE: So as cynical as I am
about, like, the acronym,
it's nice that--
template markup
pre-built at deploy time.
That sounds like a really good
thing, especially if you're
going to have a server and a--
JavaScript is good.
APIs are definitely a thing.
It seems OK.
SURMA: Exactly.
So I found it interesting,
because the next section
on the website is, when
is something not JAM?
JAKE: Right.
SURMA: And that's, I think,
a really interesting way
to phrase it.
Like, where do we draw the line?
JAKE: Marmalade.
SURMA: And so for
example, a site
built with a server-side
CMS like WordPress, Drupal,
or Joomla, or
Squarespace is not JAM.
So basically, what
they're saying is--
JAKE: Is that because their
live generating marker
of, like, a service site?
SURMA: I guess.
It feels like now that
JAM is strictly opposed
to server-type rendering.
JAKE: Well, that's a shame.
SURMA: Which I don't
necessarily agree with,
because it's such
a big performance
parameter for the first visit.
JAKE: And it's nice that
they're doing static deploy.
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE: But that's
not always possible.
SURMA: Not always, no.
For example, like, there's
this image compressor
that we're building which
is completely static,
and we have I think a
pretty good static site,
but sometimes--
JAKE: We will do, someday.
SURMA: So what they're saying
is, in Netlify, for instance,
like, instead of
building it on the fly,
they kick off their static
site generation process
every time the data changes.
So for a blog, instead
of [INAUDIBLE] a site,
they generate it on the
fly with PHP, right?
A request comes in,
PHP hits the database,
gets the most recent blog post,
gives you a list of blog posts.
JAKE: Yeah.
SURMA: They say, whenever
you publish a new blog post,
you kick off your build process
and generate a new static site.
JAKE: Scalability issues, there.
SURMA: So that's why, for
example, Phil Hawksworth
built a website with a clock
that gets rebuilt every second.
And I feel like I get it.
But also--
JAKE: That's good, actually.
Well hang on, what was
his point with that?
I mean, because it--
SURMA: He said, like, it scales.
You can build
in-site every second.
And our infrastructure
will handle that.
And they have some advantages
that I'm going to talk about.
But I feel like I get it,
and probably lots of cases
will benefit from it,
but it shouldn't be--
I guess what we
should be saying is,
the JAMstack might not
always be the right choice.
JAKE: Right.
SURMA: It's a very popular
choice right now, especially
because it's so well-supported,
because you can just
drop your stuff in a GCS
bucket or some storage thing
and it will just work.
JAKE: Yeah, I've built
a few projects recently
that fit into bucket--
into this definition
very easily.
SURMA: The second example
they give for something that's
not a JAMstack website--
a single-page app that
uses isomorphic rendering
to build views on the server
at runtime, which I guess is an
extension of the first thing.
JAKE: It seems very
much like they're
very much against
the things that
don't run on Netlify Stack.
Call me cynical.
SURMA: Ironic.
And the third example is,
a monolithic server-run web
app that relies
on the Ruby, Node
or another backend language.
So basically what they're
saying is, the JAMstack--
and I have to say, they're
not saying that the JAMstack
is the solution to everything.
JAKE: Oh, that's fair enough.
SURMA: And everybody
should be using JAMstack,
but I guess they're
saying that it's not JAM.
And that's fair to say.
JAKE: Right, fair enough.
SURMA: And the
JAMstack, I guess,
has advantages where like,
OK, if you have no dynamically
generated websites
in your backend,
but it's all static
at build time,
you have an easier
time with caching.
JAKE: Yes, absolutely.
SURMA: Because you can
just deploy it to backend,
get it to all the edge
servers straight away.
JAKE: Yes.
SURMA: And no requests
will ever have
to go back to your backend.
And that can be a
massive speedup.
JAKE: Yes.
My blog right now
is not a JAMstack.
SURMA: Interesting.
JAKE: It's a Python
Django setup.
And it's on my list of things
that I'll never get around to.
But it would be to
rebuild it as something
more closely resembling
a JAMstack-- like,
something that would
just be built from GitHub
and then sort of deployed.
Because I don't think I'll ever
hit the scalability problem
with MetaBot because of my blog.
I've only posted a
couple this year.
And it feels--
I don't want to--
my server goes down, Surma.
My server goes down
and I never know why.
I turn it off and on again,
and sometimes that works.
Sometimes it doesn't.
Sometimes it's just
used up all the disk
space with Linux kernels
it doesn't need anymore.
And it's the kind
of stuff I just
don't want to have to
deal with ever again.
SURMA: I know, right?
JAKE: It's-- yeah.
SURMA: So you have
Cloudflare in front,
and if your server
goes down, people
can still read your stuff?
JAKE: For a little bit.
SURMA: OK.
JAKE: It's not long.
But yes, Cloudflare is in
front and it handles, like,
if an article I write
does become popular.
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE: Like, Cloudflare's
taking care of all of that.
SURMA: So I'm a big
fan of the JAMstack.
I feel like it's a good pattern.
I guess what I wanted to see is,
like, an alternative, like not
just saying this is
not JAM, but like,
when is it good to be not JAM?
Because sometimes I
think it is appropriate.
JAKE: I think it must be in
that scaling point, right?
SURMA: Maybe, yeah.
I mean, I guess
what they're trying
to prove is, like, even
a website that publishes
multiple news articles a
day, like a big newspaper,
could still--
JAKE: I was thinking BBC, right?
BBC, "Guardian."
SURMA: Could still
technically be
a JAMstack, where
you just rebuilt
every time a new
thing gets published?
JAKE: You would have to--
I mean, if you
made a change that
was going to impact every page,
like, you changed the header--
SURMA: Your build system
must be really fast.
JAKE: Yeah.
SURMA: And that probably
isn't possible at the moment.
JAKE: Yeah.
Not for the amount of articles
the BBC turns out a week.
I imagine it's going to be a
tough thing for them to do.
So I think that's a
case where you want--
I guess it's the, when does
the number of visits or number
of articles you have change--
I'm trying to figure out
my words, here, right?
SURMA: There must
be an inflection
point in the build time
versus how often you deploy,
where it's like, at
this point, it is not
feasible to stay on a
JAMstack and I need just
server-side rendering on it.
JAKE: Right.
And I think there's
a possibility
that for things like
"The Guardian" and BBC,
they might have
articles that might not
be accessed between deploys.
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE: Because, like,
really old stuff.
Or would be accessed, like,
much later after it's deployed.
SURMA: So you could
optimize you build pipeline
to delay the inflection point
of staying on JAM, I guess.
JAKE: Well, what I think we want
is a gradual build process that
is triggered by visits to the
website, which is not JAM,
right?
It's their server build time.
SURMA: Yeah it is.
JAKE: But yeah.
SURMA: The one thing I really
like about this is, it pushes--
if people adhere to the
JAMstack and we make it a thing,
then we can just be like, you
should be using a JAMstack,
we will get more web apps
that have an API by default.
Because one thing I hate-- and
it's something that, actually,
our Google pros are
also not good at--
is providing an API
for third-party apps
to just build something
against it, and use the data,
or just give a better UI.
Show that it could
be done differently.
All these things
I sometimes miss.
And this would
enforce that there
is an API that you can
use, because that's what
it prescribes, pretty much.
JAKE: Yeah, absolutely.
Excuse me, sir, I need
you to stand there.
Just wait a minute.
SURMA: I need to face myself.
JAKE: I know you have
to go, but like, just--
[LAUGHTER]
Jake, I need your help.
SURMA: Who is the
prettiest off them all?
[LAUGHTER]
JAKE: So this quandary--
what do you do?